---
layout: post
date: 13 December 2013
excerpt: Some necessary post-quarter reflections.
---

*I set off to write a practical post about learning Russian, and this came out.
Oops.*

*Enjoy?*

----

Finals week is coming to a close here at Stanford. Some students have already
packed off to other climes, while some hold out for a few more days sunning on
the lawns, basking in the genial warmth of their well-deserved freedom.

So what am I doing sitting inside Green Library, banging on a keyboard? I feel
some obligation, in truth, to turn inward and think about the long-term.
Shmong-term, some friends might say. But it's too easy in my mind to otherwise
fall victim to the rush of social events, of assignments, of hurried
discussions. It's too easy to remain just a little bit behind, close enough that
grades turn out okay but far enough that there never seems to be time to just
*breathe*.

And so this my attempt to do just that. What ensues is an inevitably discursive
coverage of the events of this past quarter. Brace yourself for inflated
sentiment and vigorous hand-waving.

### The plunge

Smile. Handshake. Where-are-you-from-what-is-your-major. Repeat.

"New Student Orientation" at Stanford---a week of Guaranteed Fun prescribed and
orchestrated by the university---was in retrospect just a bit too terribly
awkward for my liking. We frosh, each decorated with lanyard and a complimentary
week-long agenda booklet, were carted from auditorium to dormitory and back from
early morning until far past any sensible bedtime. While I can't deny that some
of these events were inspiring, motivating, etc. etc., I find looking back that
I was driven toward what were absolutely the wrong ends. I made too many
"friends" and not enough friends. Rectified quickly, of course, as shall be
illustrated. But if I were to do it again I would skip the events and go for the
people instead.

### Surfacing[^1]

Classes came abruptly, without any sort of warning, much in the same way that my
bike chain broke on the first day. An ominous start indeed.

But classes turned right soon enough. It was in these classes that I began to
see more of the Stanford I had dreamed about. A [bare-bones statistics class][1]
with no prerequisites in which every student turned out to already know
calculus, followed by a [seminar][2] in which jokes about the Stoics and
utilitarianism actually got laughs. Every alumnus and student will confirm that
Stanford's environment is all about the people. But you can't understand until
you live here and realize just how brilliant your companions are---until you can
grasp that that hoodied kid on a trick bike is a published author, or that girl
you just chatted with has been documenting exoplanets for years.

Everyone is a superstar in their own way. And the most fantastic thing is that
the large majority of them don't even know it. This is not taught modesty. It's
something more, I think, like a blatant disregard for recognition of any sort,
perhaps because of a disbelief in the magnitude of their accomplishments. People
here see their work as part of their life. They carry a different idea of the
split, that is, between effort and play.

Classes continued. Friend circles formed. After an aberrant week of extroversion
on my part, I returned to my natural hermit state, accompanied by several
like-minded companions.

### Lessons

I can't think of anything extremely noteworthy past this period of adjustment.
In short: fun times were had. Bonds were strengthened. Things were learned.

I didn't truly assimilate what is likely to be my most important lesson, though,
until very recently. It seems that both a [class][2] and my peers conspired to
teach me a certain thing about life.[^2] More specifically, about the great
benefit in living intentionally. Planning, that is, and reflecting often upon
who I am, who I want to be, and what exactly I need to accomplish to make that
desired me a reality.

My eyes have been opened to [self-reliance][3] and [self-writing][4], in both of
which exists tremendous potential for growth and for a truer understanding. I've
been motivated to pursue---well, heck, I am pursuing at this very moment---a
life centered around these ideas.

I'm only scratching the surface of the effect which this quarter has had on me.
It's not feasible to directly express just how much I have changed. I suppose it
will be visible in the future posts here.

I half-joked with my dad earlier this year[^3] that the best graduation gift
would be four years at a university. I see now that there's no joke in that at
all. I am being changed and I am changing. What an outstanding place.

Enough---I'm off to enjoy the sun.

[^1]: Pardon the cheesy extended metaphor. I'm trying a new style here, so different from my normal prose that I am irritating myself as I write it. &hellip; No, it's more than a style. Gosh, am I turning postmodern or something?
[^2]: Or maybe I am twisting all of my experiences to jive with the lessons that I think I should be learning. Yeah, that might be it.
[^3]: Feels more like a decade ago.

[1]: http://statweb.stanford.edu/~sabatti/Stat48/
[2]: https://undergrad.stanford.edu/programs/special-focus-programs/esf
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-Reliance
[4]: http://foucault.info/documents/foucault.hypomnemata.en.html
