---
layout: post
date: 14 December 2013
title: Goals for Winter 2014
excerpt: I wrote in yesterday's quarterly review about living more intentionally. I'd like to begin to follow through over the next few days by establishing public goals over two time horizons&#58; <em>quarterly goals</em> and <em>yearly goals</em>.
---

I wrote in yesterday's [quarterly review][1] about living more intentionally.
I'd like to begin to follow through over the next few days by establishing
public goals over two time horizons: *quarterly goals*[^1] and *yearly goals*.
The inspiration for making these goals public comes from [Peter Hurford][2],
whose detailed goal posts and in-depth public progress reviews show just how
much benefit can come from such a process.

I'll begin by setting several goals for the winter 2014 quarter, which begins in
January. Come the end of winter quarter, I'll sit down and review publicly my
progress on the goals set in this post.

### Timeboxing

I've been maintaining a timeboxing practice since early November. I've been
pretty rigorous about it, scheduling a large majority of my day ahead of time
and working hard to follow through on the tasks I set out for myself. The habit
has made me wonderfully productive and opened up[^2] lots of free time for
reading, exploration, social activities, etc.

I've benefited so much from this practice that I think it merits its coverage in
its own post. I'll likely cover this soon, describing the exact implementation I
am using and perhaps giving an analysis using this data of how I spend my time.

In the coming quarter, I want to put even more trust in these timeboxes by
accomplishing the following:

1. **Maintain an early-morning timeboxing ritual.** I've slacked on some days
   and left myself to timebox on-the-go, scheduling activities only an hour or
   less before they actually happen. I find this has a significant negative
   effect on my productivity, since I have a much less clear vision of what I
   want to accomplish once I'm already in the rush of things during the day.
2. **Get better at allocating realistic boxes.** Too often I found that I
   scheduled too optimistically, expecting myself to finish this essay in a half
   hour or that reading in 15 minutes. I would then fall behind in my schedule
   and end up 1) having to push every event forward manually or 2) abandoning
   the schedule altogether and recreating something entirely different. This
   second point is especially harmful (see previous paragraph).
3. **Adhere more rigorously to the schedule.** Assuming that I manage to
   allocate time realistically, I can use timeboxing for yet another purpose in
   combating [Parkinson's law][3]. I want to work hard to finish tasks within
   the time bounds I set for myself. This goal is measureable in the number of
   times that I end up changing my schedule per day. I'd like to commit to
   **changing my schedule three times or fewer per day.**

### Sleep

An inevitable issue for a college student, yes? I've been surprised, actually,
that regularly getting a healthy amount of sleep as a Stanford student is not
difficult at all.[^3] I'd still like to work on the following less absolutely
crucial issues, though, with regards to sleep:

1. **Fix weekday wake-up time.** I know from past experience that I can gain a
   lot by simply ensuring the time I have available in the morning is
   constant.[^4] It's much easier in such an environment to establish good
   habits and rituals. I'm considering something around 6:00 right now---this is
   just a bit left of my mean weekday wake-up time over the past quarter.
2. **Establish an early weekday night routine.** This routine will most likely
   be centered around reading in bed, a practice which I unfortunately let go in
   my first quarter. I'll have to work out a reasonable regular bedtime which
   matches well with the fixed wake-up time (whatever yields around 8 hours of
   sleep).

### Social activities

Finding a work-play balance at Stanford has been by far the most difficult point
of adjustment. Timeboxing and pre-commitment with peers has done a lot to help
me counter [akrasia][5], but I have also found that these rigid practices can
clash with social life.[^5] I want to think hard about how to fashion my social
time so that a) I can be the best companion possible and b) and I can derive the
most benefit from my social activities. In short, I want to be just as
*intentional* about social time as I am about life in general. In this spirit, I
establish the following goals:

1. **Increase the value of each moment of social time.** The solution here has
   to do with picking the proper times, places, and manners of social
   interaction. I need to be less shy about stepping out of long, drifting
   hallway conversations and seek out better opportunities to bond with friends.
2. **Reduce total social time.** With an increase in the per-moment value of
   social interaction I can thus decrease the time input without putting anyone
   at a disadvantage. I should schedule social time just as I do work (currently
   the regions I leave un-boxed are dominated by social time, wandering, etc.).

### Language learning

As I will reveal in a forthcoming post about my year-long goals, language
learning will form no small part of my activities in 2014. I will be deploying a
few techniques that I have been thinking about, but I'd rather not commit to
them for an entire year. We can start at the quarter level:

1. **Post video or audio of speaking practice.** This will make me feel more
   accountable for my own progress, and hopefully help spur me to keep the
   language practice going for an entire year.
2. **[Shadow.][6]** I may well not find a good speaking partner for several
   weeks / months, and so to ensure that I work hard on pronunciation, prosody,
   etc. I would like to shadow using Assimil content.

----

I'm only more excited now that this post is finished. I have a lot of personal
progress to make with these goals this quarter, alongside some really exciting
classes:

- [CS 93SI: Introduction to Functional Programming with Haskell][11]
- [CS 107: Computer Organization and Systems][7]
- [CS 124: From Languages to Information][8] (intro NLP class)
- [CS 229A: Applied Machine Learning][9]
- [DANCE 46: Social Dance 1][10]

and a more routine one:

- [MATH 51: Linear Algebra and Differential Calculus of Several Variables][12]
  (hopefully mostly a review)

This is a pretty heavy load (by Stanford standards!), and so I might end up
dropping one or multiple classes. We'll see how things go in a few weeks!

[1]: /2013/q1
[2]: http://everydayutilitarian.com
[3]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parkinson's_law
[4]: http://www.sleepcycle.com/
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akrasia
[6]: http://roadtoepic.com/language-shadowing-learn-a-language-by-looking-like-a-crazy-person/
[7]: http://cs107.stanford.edu
[8]: http://cs124.stanford.edu
[9]: http://cs229a.stanford.edu/
[10]: http://explorecourses.stanford.edu/CourseSearch/search?view=catalog&filter-coursestatus-Active=on&page=0&catalog=&q=dance+46&collapse=
[11]: http://explorecourses.stanford.edu/search?view=catalog&filter-coursestatus-Active=on&page=0&catalog=&academicYear=&q=cs+93si&collapse=
[12]: http://math51.stanford.edu

[^1]: Stanford quarters, that is. The academic calendar here is split into four ten-week quarters (winter, spring, summer, and fall), each buffered by vacations.
[^2]: Made visible, rather---it was always there!
[^3]: YMMV. I know students here who are regularly pulling all-nighters or staying up far too late working. I am guessing this may be simply a result of overscheduling or of time mismanagement.
[^4]: In practice, this will need to be fudged a bit. I use [Sleep Cycle][4] to wake up at whatever point within a 30-minute range is best for my health, so I'll be fixing a brief time range rather than a single point.
[^5]: Everything is spontaneous and last-minute in the college-dorm social sphere. More spontaneous and more last-minute than you could imagine.
