---
title: Q2
date: 26 March 2014
excerpt: A quarter of <em>progress:</em> the benefits (and challenges) of living intentionally
layout: post
---

I'm here on campus for spring break. I have to say it's been a productive
vacation thus far on multiple axes --- CoreNLP-related work is coming along
well, and I've reached just about my maximum level of tan after several
day-trips to the city.

With so much free time I no longer have any excuse to postpone my review of the
quarter. As befits a quarter dominated by engineering classes, this review will
be much more analytical than the previous. This time around, I have the tools to
begin major comparative analysis on two fronts: I can evaluate my behavior
qualitatively in comparison with the previous quarter, and I can also use my
timebox data to quantitatively evaluate that same behavior.[^1]

## What changed?

"What stayed the same?" might be an easier question to answer. This quarter
began with an overhaul of some central elements of my life, most notably
concerning:

- **Social interaction.** I played the extrovert for a significant portion of
  the start of the quarter. As will be evident in a forthcoming timebox analysis
  for the quarter, this behavior eventually vanished as I regressed into a
  hermitic state, unfortunately not in the most healthy manner. I arranged my
  social life in a way that ended up causing undue stress by the end of the
  quarter.
- **Time allocation.** This will again be clearer once I've completed my timebox
  analysis, but the way I spent my time this quarter was just drastically
  different from how I acted the fall. I cut down social time by more than half,
  and also spent notably fewer hours per week on schoolwork. All this resultant
  free time I poured into the extracurricular projects of the season: personal
  projects, job applications, and interviews.
- **Rationality practices and other rituals.** I struggled to maintain my
  practice of periodic reviews and daily reading[^9] as the quarter progressed.
  I failed to allocate the proper time for these high-value activities.

## Projects

A large amount of my time this quarter was redirected from schoolwork to
"extracurricular" projects.

### Careering

The winter quarter is traditionally job-hunting[^2] season here at Stanford, and
I played right along: I spent a substantial amount of time, especially in
January and February, involved in career-related activities. This began with
resume work and career fairs, and ended with (luckily!) a long stream of
interviews and travel. I exited the whole ordeal with a summer research position
here at Stanford, with the [Stanford NLP Group][1] under
[Dr. Christopher Manning][2].

"Ordeal" is the wrong word, however. I actually derived some outstanding
benefits from the whole process, and don't regret the decision to begin a job
search at all.

I somehow made my way through my first two programming jobs without once doing a
technical interview (or any interview at all, for that matter). I understandably
felt a little threatened by the prospect of strolling into an interview this
winter. After two or three, though, I managed to eradicate the fear, and began
to understand exactly how I could rock these things. I can't say I'd voluntarily
do another one right now, but I have to say I enjoyed them in the end --- these
relatively free-form conversations and "tests" with fellow software developers
were a real relief after several months of programming in a uniquely academic
context.

Furthermore, preparing for and going through these interviews forced me to ask
serious questions about my own value as a developer. I left each interview full
of motivation and confidence, as each made me realize just how much my
human-capital investments over the past half-decade or so are now going to pay
off.[^3] Less formally put, the interviews showed me where all my hard work has
been going over the past *n* years.

### Programming

The remainder of my new free time was largely dedicated to coding projects.
These involved building a site for the Symbolic Systems student group here on
campus, and several small NLP-related projects (Clojure bindings for CoreNLP,
and a simple DIPRE-like relation extraction algorithm).

## Goal updates

Time for the meaty stuff. How did I do on following through with my
[goals for the quarter][3]?

### Timeboxing

I've been very happy with my timeboxing practice this quarter. It's allowed me
to keep my days wonderfully organized, and pushed me to be more productive. My
timeboxing-related goals for the quarter were:

1. **Maintain an early-morning timeboxing ritual.** I hesitate to call what I've
   ended up with an "early-morning" ritual --- what with my biphasic sleep
   practice I'm no longer up as early as I used to be --- but I have indeed
   established a good habit of completely scheduling my day in the mornings.
   There have been very few days that have seen me go past my morning routine
   without also building a schedule.
2. **Get better at allocating realistic boxes.** Great success here. I seem to
   have improved at making estimations from intuition about the time required
   for everyday tasks.
3. **Adhere more rigorously to the schedule.** I didn't end up collecting
   concrete data on the number of schedule changes per day, but I can say it was
   zero or very close to zero for most days. I'm really comfortable now with
   following through on the goals I set for myself each morning.[^4]

### Sleep

My goals in this area were squashed in some amount, overshadowed by my biphasic
sleep experiment.

1. **Fix weekday wakeup time.** This has just not been realistic what with the
   variable-time waking segment of my biphasic schedule.
2. **Establish an early weeknight routine.** I failed here as well, but this
   time there's less of an excuse. I did a pretty terrible job at sticking to
   [my commitment][4] of an 8:30 bedtime --- I'm somewhat embarrassed I didn't
   see the trouble ahead of time. This early bedtime does not jive at all with
   efforts to retain some semblance of a social life. I rarely made it to bed on
   time, and when I did I was too eager to sleep[^5] to think about doing some
   ritual reading.

### Social activities

My social behavior radically changed this quarter, in some amount as a result of
intentional effort and in some amount as a result of a lack of control on my
part. My first try at [social dance][5] and my actions at the start of the
quarter jetted me into the shoes of an extrovert for several weeks. Thus
unmoored, I poured a lot of time into social activities. Things changed
mid-quarter as I began a string of job interviews which dominated my time,
leaving paltry remains for any outings with friends.

Post interview week, I found it too easy to return back to my familiar
hermit-land. I realized that my behavior earlier in the quarter had really
drained my energy, and that I needed to get back to life as an introvert. I
bounced back far too harshly, though, and ended up in something of a social
slump at the end of the quarter.

Some of the most positive effects of this rollercoaster ride manifest themselves
in my goal progress, described below:

1. **Increase the value of each moment of social time.** I think I did an
   outstanding job here. I worked this quarter to completely eliminate low-value
   social engagements[^6] and was happy to find that doing so had very little
   visible negative impact on my relationships with others. The time I did
   retain for social activities was dedicated to higher-value things such as
   more formal intellectual conversations,[^7] one-on-one conversations and
   meals, attending clubs and academic discussions, running outside, and
   dancing.[^8]
2. **Reduce total social time.** Sure, no problem. My timebox analysis (again,
   forthcoming) shows that my social time (relative to total time boxed)
   decreased by a staggering amount this quarter. I haven't detected much
   adverse effect in my relationships with others as a result of this decrease,
   perhaps because of the aforementioned increase in high-value social
   activities which by definition do quite a lot to sustain good friendships.

### Language learning

Ouch.

I ended up allocating very little time for language learning this quarter. Much
of the time I did spend was spent not on German (as set out in my
[yearly goal][6]) but on maintaining the other languages I speak (most notably
Romanian and Spanish). It's not worth going over the individual commitments I
made at the start of the quarter: they all completely failed.

## Summary

This was a quarter of *progress:* progress both in my career and in my personal
development. I made great strides forward in many areas, but also made mistakes
in too ambitious or misguided strides elsewhere.

Thanks are due to my friends here at Stanford, who kept me honest about my
progress on my goals, encouraged me to keep up with positive rationality
practices, and put up with all my weird experiments. They've been a great
support in this respect, and I hope they benefit from my friendship in the same
degree that I do theirs.

As I've covered in (excruciating?) detail above, I'm really happy with the
effects of the goals I managed to complete. This practice of *intentional
living* has thus far been unambiguously positive, and I hope to extend both the
scope and depth of my plans for the coming quarter. Watch this space for a goals
post sequel, coming soon!

[1]: http://nlp.stanford.edu
[2]: http://nlp.stanford.edu/manning
[3]: /2013/winter-2014
[4]: /2013/biphasic-sleep
[5]: http://socialdance.stanford.edu
[6]: /2013/german-2014

[^1]: I'll leave much of the in-depth quantitative analysis for a separate timebox analysis post. The insights that such an analysis produces are still useful in this context, though.
[^2]: (and internship-hunting)
[^3]: Pay off.. literally.
[^4]: Comfortable? Hmm.. maybe I should be more ambitious, then. :)
[^5]: Because I was already late for bed, that is.
[^6]: This includes hallway conversations, most meals, large group outings, et cetera. A post at some point on the relative value of social time would probably be worth it.
[^7]: i.e., not in a hallway and with a clear predefined topic.
[^8]: Yes, dancing is extraordinarily high value! I've found partner dancing to be a really outstanding way to bond and get closer with (literally?) a friend.
[^9]: It's obvious I slacked in this area.. Sunday Links shall eventually return. Eventually.
