---
layout: post
title: Goals for Spring 2014
date: 30 March 2014
excerpt:
---

I [made wonderful progress][1] this winter after establishing for myself a set
of diverse goals. In this post I'll set myself up for similar success in the
spring with a new collection of things to aim for. While last quarter my goals
fit nicely into a few broad categories, the goals I've set up this quarter
aren't as nicely distributed. I'll present them this time in two classes:
"sleep" and "everything else."

## Sleep

I've been paying close attention to my sleep habits over the past quarter. It's
worth being especially vigilant, given that I've been
[intentionally meddling][2] with my sleep schedule.

I'll outline my biphasic sleep program in a forthcoming post,[^1] but suffice it
to say for the moment that my segmented sleep has been a pretty resounding
success. While I fully intend to sustain this habit through the quarter, I also
want to establish some further structure around my sleep schedule:

1. **Establish a realistic fixed weeknight bedtime.** I [failed pretty badly][3]
   with my (admittedly overly ambitious) 8:30 bedtime as I set out in my
   original biphasic plan. I want to spend the first week or two of the quarter
   figuring out a realistic bedtime for weeknights (probably somewhere between
   9:30 and 10:30), and then stick to this time for the rest of the quarter.
2. **Enforce a weeknight bedtime routine.** Last quarter's
   [weeknight routine goal][3] was also a no-go. I expect that with a fixed
   bedtime, however, such a ritual will be easier to maintain.

## Everything else

What follows is a grab bag of miscellaneous goals, spurred either by failures
from last quarter or from new ideas that I'd like to put into action:

- **Set up a regular fitness routine.** I had something of an ad-hoc fitness
  schedule last quarter, with gym visits on Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday and an
  occasional outdoor run on Saturday. I want to maintain this good habit, of
  course, and perhaps formalize the times a bit more. Again, I'll need to live
  through the first week of the quarter before I can determine the days when
  it'd be easiest to fit in these activities.
- **Revive some of my foreign languages.** I'm going to postpone my ambitious
  [German plans][4] for the quarter, and instead focus on reviving both my
  French and Spanish. I realized during this past week's break just how dearly I
  missed using my French, and wish to give it more of my time for learning
  benefit and fun this quarter. Likewise, I've neglected Spanish recently, and I
  think it deserves more attention.[^2]
- **Talk to people.** More specifically, I want to become more active in my
  academics. Making a deliberate effort to connect with my professors and
  instructors will allow me to derive much more benefit from the classes in
  which I'm enrolled.[^3] I especially want to get involved with the instructors
  in my classes this quarter on [natural language understanding][4] and
  introductory economics.
- **Keep working on *intentional* social activities.** This goal yielded some
  enormously positive improvements last quarter, and I'd like to keep vigilant
  in my search for the best ways to be social: those that best help me relate to
  and bond with others, and establish mutually beneficial relationships.

<hr/>

And here comes my third quarter of classes:

- [CS 110: Principles of Computer Systems][5]
- [CS 202: Law for Computer Science Professionals][6]
- [CS 224U: Natural Language Understanding][7]
- [ECON 1: Principles of Economics][8]

I'm really excited to see how these goals and these classes unfold. Onward, to
progress!

[1]: /2014/q2#goal-updates
[2]: /2013/biphasic-sleep
[3]: /2014/q2#sleep
[4]: http://cs224u.stanford.edu
[5]: http://cs110.stanford.edu
[6]: http://cs202.stanford.edu
[7]: http://cs224u.stanford.edu
[8]: http://explorecourses.stanford.edu/CourseSearch/search?q=econ+1&view=catalog&page=0&academicYear=&filter-units-5=on&filter-time-1=on&filter-day-2=on&filter-day-3=on&filter-day-4=on&filter-day-5=on&filter-ger-GERDBSocSci=on&collapse=%2C3%2C2%2C5%2C&filter-coursestatus-Active=on

[^1]: How many of these "forthcoming" posts have I promised now?
[^2]: Especially because my summer plans are centered around computational linguistics in Spanish!
[^3]: As some of my more innately studious peers have demonstrated to me over the past quarters..
