---
title: I saw a dog
layout: post
main: false
date: 13 February 2018
---

---as I walked down a quiet side-street in Cambridge, not far from Central
Square. I was glued to my phone and couldn't make out so many details without
looking up, but I could see that it was middle-sized and black, facing
north-east.

I could tell this was a dog not only from its shape, but also from that
primitive *thwang* that triggers within me when I encounter a dog in public.
I'm not afraid of dogs -- I've spent most of my life near one canine or another
-- but am still wary around random dogs on the street, leashed or not. Maybe
it's an adaptive instinct, or maybe it's just me acting out my role as Safety
Sam.

In any case, I felt that *thwang* as I registered the dog's basic features.
Black, medium size -- maybe a black labrador. I raised my head, ready to step
out of the way, smile at the owner, follow the basic program. But there was no
dog.

What was in front of me was not a black labrador, but a commuter bike locked to
a slightly oblique street sign. The bike had a thin black seat and narrow road
tires, with a rusty pannier rack framing its back wheel. Its handlebars -- drop
bars, taped black -- were angled away from me. No dog in sight.

How could my own experience of the world be so *wrong?*

---

Am I pathological? I don't think so. I've been noticing more of these
experiences -- call them *non-veridical* experiences -- over the past few
months. Sights, sounds, and sensations occasionally reveal themselves to be
little fibs: reasonable, but ultimately inaccurate, pictures of what is
*actually* out there in the real world. Or---more precisely---what are revealed
as fibs are my *perceptions* of those sensations.

This is exactly the change that's come about in my subjective experience, then:
I have witnessed a growing chasm between these two processes of sensation and
perception.[^1]

I take **sensation** to be the physical process of visible light entering my eye
and eventually leading to electrical signals firing off into my brain
somewhere. If there's anything tied to my own experience that shows what is
*actually* out there in the real world, then it is these sensations. They are
my link to reality.

But those sensations don't directly give rise to my conscious experience. They
are mediated by a process of **perception**, which parses some sort of
information out of this raw experience. I perceive that thin bike seat as a
labrador's head, and the black-taped drop bars as its floppy black ears. This
process merges that "real" stuff with messy piles of cognitive content: it
draws on my conceptual knowledge of how the world might be organized (dogs
exist; bikes exist; dogs don't ride bikes) and on my beliefs about how my
experience should look at this moment.

---

- intro *Perplexities of Consciousness*
- link perception/sensation to ch 5 discussion on introspection: what does it mean to become a "trained introspector?"
- positive final thoughts

[^1]: What follows is a mostly impromptu exposition of my understanding of my own phenomenal experience, largely influenced by both modern consciousness science and ancient Buddhist thought. I don't intend to offer a master-class here --- there are more reliable resources than blogs for that sort of thing. I'm just trying to work out my own theory here: please bear with me (or don't)!
