---
layout: post
title: Blogging in 2014
excerpt: What exactly do I want to get out of this blog? What purpose does it serve for myself and for others? I answer these questions and set out plans for the next year below the fold.
---

The fall quarter ended with a [flurry][1] of [blog][2] [posts][3]. I had been
promising myself that I would get to writing articles like these in the near
future, and when the post-finals free time arrived I knew it was time to get to
business.

This is [not my][5] [first attempt][6] at sustaining a blog --- it's actually
the third time I've attempted to establish an online presence through writing.
I've learned through these repeated failures that the hardest part of amateur
blogging is continuing to chug along after that initial burst of inspiration.
For this reason I want to make my intentions and motivation concrete from the
start---that is, make a public commitment and a public statement about why I am
following through with this. Hopefully when the raw inspiration peters out this
post and others will serve as perfect substitutes.

Let me first swoop into the third person in order to declare the exact purpose
of this site:

**foldl** is a personal weblog published by Jon Gauthier.[^1] It contains
writings both brief and long-form, ranging from concise link posts to detailed
inquiries on focused subjects. The spread of subjects is vast. Ramblings on
economics are followed by concrete personal development plans, which are in
turned succeeded by a coverage of circularly recursive functions in the Haskell
programming language. No pretense of consistency or thematic focus is admitted.
Honesty, validity, and sincerity in writing are of top priority.

The content I intend to publish here can be grouped into three broad and vague
categories:

1. Long-form discussions of topics I care about
2. Updates on personal development ([goal tracking][2], [time analysis][3],
   etc.)
3. Miscellanea (e.g., [Sunday Links][4] and the like)

[1]: /2013/q1
[2]: /2013/winter-2014
[3]: /2013/q1-time-analysis
[4]: /2013/sunday-links-4
[5]: http://hansengel.wordpress.com
[6]: http://hansengel.tumblr.com

[^1]: Insert awkward sidenote about the Hans pseudonym here.
