---
title: Q3
date: 14 June 2014
excerpt:
layout: post
---

Well, that went more quickly than expected.

I'm a sophomore. *A sophomore.* I don't feel like I'm ready to be associated
with that word. Wasn't I just wandering around campus in a daze with my fellow
lanyard-adorned freshmen a few months ago?

In this third post in my (hopefully long-lived) series of quarterly reflections,
I want to dissect the final quarter as a freshman here and try to figure out how
I changed during this final rush of my first year.

## What changed?

The 2014 trend continues: where I've grown most is in how I relate to other
people. This spring was defined in particular by the two relevant goals I set
for myself at the end of March.

The first, a blithely-worded challenge to "talk to people," led me to form some
of the most fascinating professional relationships thus far in my brief adult
life. These new relationships were catalysts for some notable happenings this
quarter, including submitting a paper to [an NLP conference][1] and hanging out
with[^1] Alan Greenspan at a high-falutin central banking conference. I'll
detail the steps I took in making progress on this goal and what I plan to do
next in [the corresponding goal updates section below][2].

My second task was to proceed in exploring how to be more *intentional* about
social activities: to figure out which engagements are of the highest value for
me and my companions, and to figure out how to involve myself with more of such
engagements. The lesson this quarter taught was not what I expected in setting
this goal at the end of March.

Something led me to realize this quarter that not everything in this social
realm can be planned out in some deterministic perfection. The truth is that
people---even more, the relations between people---are just *squishy,*
*unpredictable,* *irrational.* Someone forgets something, two people are brought
together by an accident, a group decides at the last moment to change plans. In
this way social relations are somewhat frustratingly chaotic. A butterfly flaps
its wings in Tanzania and we wake up a little bit happier than we would have
otherwise. That sort of thing.

Anyway, perhaps it was the beautiful spring weather here at Stanford, but I
finally realized this quarter the futility of the aggressive planning of social
relations. The lesson is that I can't *plan* to be a successful socialite.
Things are just too messy, too inevitably last-minute. The best opportunities
come unexpected, unlabeled; the most I can or should do is to be prepared to
take advantage of them.

It may seem that the lessons emerging from these two major goals are
contradictory. I don't believe so, and I plan to reconcile the two and think
about future changes in [the end of my review][3].

## Goal updates

Let's evaluate in detail how I progressed in
[my goals for the spring of 2014][4].

### Sleep

I've maintained a biphasic sleep schedule for the majority of the quarter,
though I've occasionally "gone mono[phasic]" on the weekends in order to make up
for some late Friday- and Saturday-night spontaneity. Things are relatively
stable otherwise, and I'm pleased with the program overall.

The sleep-related goals I set at the start of the quarter had to do with bedtime
routine. I've succeeded in establishing a fixed weeknight bedtime, as well as
building an informal routine around this time: my first sleep is now
conventionally preceded by 15 to 30 minutes of focused reading.[^2] This
normalization of night activities has done much good for my sleep quality, I
think (and also for my reading!).

### Talk to people

At the end of March I claimed that connecting with my professors would "allow me
to derive much more benefit from the classes in which I'm enrolled."

I'm not sure if I could have put it any more dryly than that. It was in
retrospect, as I have hopefully made evident by this point, a massive
understatement: in making an effort to relate with my instructors this quarter,
I discovered an entire new dimension of the university experience. The insight,
advice, and opportunities I've been exposed to in just one quarter as a result
of these initial efforts has changed my personal outlook and my career.

Things didn't begin with a bang by any means. I marked the start of April as a
sort of "social challenge": I would use a success spiral[^3] to move from
relatively trivial assignments to things that were more out of my comfort zone
by the end of the week.

I began by asking questions and contributing in the several first days of
classes for the quarter. I suppose it's proof of my growth that these tasks,
which seemed like a difficult way to start at the time, now seem pretty
unremarkable.

I stepped things up a notch later in the week, sending an email to a
professor[^4] and then staying after class to follow up on the message. I
spiraled upward after this, visiting his office and launching into a wonderful
extended discussion.

But it's mostly history from here --- I continued to meet regularly with this
professor and several others over the rest of the quarter. Each served as a
mentor and intellectual guide for me over these months in his own way, and I am
grateful for the different manners in which each influenced my thoughts,
beliefs, and plans.

I can't imagine going back to a student life without this sort of positive
influence and support. In coming quarters I'll use the same spirals and other
commitment mechanisms in order to acquaint myself with more of my superiors.

### Intentional social activities

For much of this academic year I've carried a goal which has had to do in some
way with being *intentional* about the ways in which I relate to others. I've
been a bit fuzzy about the meaning of this word "intentional" in this context.
In its original uses, I believe I meant "intentional" as in "thinking before
saying yes to social engagements, and actively seeking out positive
engagements." My usage of the word has since evolved, however, to mean something
like "planning out every social activity in advance."

I'm not happy with this kind of "intentional" social behavior, as I explained in
[a previous section][6]. Some of the jolliest, most memorable, and/or most
influential social times emerged from things unplanned. What I take from these
recent experiences is that it's not possible to *rule out* all opportunities of
this type from afar. TODO

### Everything else

There isn't too much more to say about the remaining goals, but I'll cover them
here, since I don't want them to be completely forgotten.

- **Regular fitness.** I carried my exercise schedule over from the previous
  quarter, with gym visits on Tuesday and Thursday and the occasional run on
  Saturday or Sunday.
- **Foreign language revival.** This is the one goal which saw some amount of
  failure this quarter. While I did fairly well in reviving Spanish (doing lots
  of listening practice and making a point to speak with friends more often in
  Spanish), I dropped the ball with respect to French. I am not too ashamed
  about this: it ended up that other projects of the quarter (research, writing,
  assignments, etc.) simply deserved a higher priority than French work.

## Summary

I should work to make up for what might seem like a contradiction at the moment.
The two principal goal-induced revelations of the quarter both had to do with
interacting and relating with others. The first, which was a result of my
campaign to connect with intellectual superiors, demonstrated that there is much
to gain from an intentional approach to social relations, especially
professional ones. The second TODO

[^1]: "Near?" Basically the same thing, I think.
[^2]: i.e., reading a book or a long article rather than surfing the web
[^3]: Detailed in Nick Winter's wonderful book [The Motivation Hacker][5].
[^4]: An email! *Directly* to him! Can you believe it?

[1]: http://emnlp2014.org
[2]: #talk-to-people
[3]: #summary
[4]: /2014/spring-2014-goals
[5]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0989279820/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0989279820&linkCode=as2&tag=blog0cbb-20&linkId=MDHXF7HVMOGFUYFG
[6]: #what-changed

<img src="http://ir-na.amazon-adsystem.com/e/ir?t=blog0cbb-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0989279820" width="1" height="1" border="0" alt="" style="border:none !important; margin:0px !important;" />
